I mentioned that before, because I over-commit
myself always. And they were not over-committing
themselves at all. So I pushed them. I pushed Susan
to get books in earlier than was comfortable, to
push the printers and push the binders. And I
pushed Noel to get more manuscripts in, not to
reject them because we don't have time to review
them. And I pushed them on their dates and said,
we've got to have things done earlier. And so we
just pushed and pushed and worked on increasing
acquisitions. And we took risks. I pushed them to
take risks with their selections and with the
quantities. We did that quest for the presidency.
And GALA wanted to publish 15,000, and I pushed
them to publish 25,000, which they did. And
somewhere in between is what we ended up selling.
We went over 15,000, but we didn't get up to 25,000.
But I wanted them to feel the commitment and the
excitement and the push. I think that's going to go
well. It's been an old concept of the series and the
idea. I think Marilyn has basically directions
That's
exciting. That was another new thing that we got
into was that whole George Bush connection.
I won't take credit for having started that
connection, but I do think that I really pushed
them to strengthen that connection. Yeah, it's so
obvious. I think there's so many areas in New
Orleans that have failed to really count,
including this bridge. I don't think we don't have
a thing. Oh, I don't think so. And that quest for the
presidency, that had to be done in impossible time
constraints. We had to do from start to finish in
six months on that book. And everybody said it
can't be done. It can be done, but it can be done. But
it was done. I've seen it done. Not here,
necessarily. I said the commercial publishers
can do it, but I can't read it. And I think if Rick
Stetter had been there, they would have let it go.
They wanted to do it. They were excited about it.
And it was one of the most fun things that we did.
That was when we got to, several of us got to go to
What's her name? Catherine Graham's home in
Washington, D.C., and we had the coming out party,
and George Stephanopoulos was there, and Cokie
Roberts was there, and it was wonderful. It was
really glamorous. That story is the only
excitement. Oh, I know. That's great. That's
good. And it can be known. That's good. Okay, we
worked on minimizing conservatism, and then the
important thing is I tried to, in the team
building, to emphasize that internal customer,
and I mentioned that to you also, that our
customers first are one another, because if I'm
not serving your needs, you're not going to get
your job done. And so we all recognized that we were
serving someone else's needs inside the press,
and then finally we had an external customer.
okay so that's what i did that's what i tried to do
and i think that's what we succeeded at doing that
sounds really good now at some point uh we're going
to search for a new director at what point and why
and when did you signal that how did that happen um
well i think um The original intention was that I
was going to go in and kind of bring them together as
a group and clean up their finances, too, because
they had serious financial problems. I didn't
even mention that, but we worked on that
constantly, trying to figure out the finances and
get them into reasonable financial shape. There
was an audit going on at the time. Were they doing
that? There were two things going on. First of all,
prior to my getting there, When I was working with
Rick, we also did an operational review. We took
this group that reported to me, and I've neglected
to mention that because that was a big part of it
also, this operations analysis that reported to
me at the time that I was meeting with Rick, and they
did an operational review during which they
discovered all the turmoil in the organization.
At the same time, internal audit went in and did an
audit, and they discovered that nobody knew
anything about what was going on with the
bookkeeping and the finances and all of that. It
wasn't being handled properly, and there were
some serious issues uh checks and balance
problems and things like that so we continue to
have internal audit come in and help to fix all
those we brought in people from the fiscal office
to help us to figure out a better accounting system
that is not my strength and that's not the strength
of anyone in the press it is tom's now yes
So I wasn't real successful in getting the proper
accounting system in, but I was successful in
getting some accountability and in getting us to
open up the books. Because no one but Diana Hine
knew what existed. So we started discussing the
finances in these weekly staff meetings, and
everybody got a much better understanding of what
we really had and didn't have. Because she had them
convinced that they were really in the red. And of
course we had these enormous balances in all these
accounts that we weren't doing anything with. And
some of that still exists. I talked to her the other
day. Just an aside, I picked up that there was
accounts that are really being unused. Oh, there
are. And so what we try to do is... I'm sure Tom will
send them those in due time. Well, and what I
encourage Tom to do is to focus on getting some of
that money out of there. And some of that might be by
opening up the parameters of those accounts like
we did with the... He talked about money a little
bit, incidentally, and his view that the press is
doing very well financially, as compared to other
presses, quite secure, and that he plans to tell
the world about it. I said, I think that's good,
Tom, because I think if people understand that
you've been financially accountable, et cetera,
et cetera, then you should get more respect and
more support from the administration. He said,
well, a lot of people around here think that if you
tell people how much money you have, they'll try to
take it away from you. That's true. Or what they'll
do is take away any kind of assistance that they're
given. That's right, yeah. And so that still
exists within the press. I heard that mentioned
several times, that they're going to lose their
operations money because they're doing too well
or something like that. And Trump says, no, I'm not
going to deal with it that way. You're doing well,
and I want the world to know I don't. So that's
interesting. I knew all the auditing was going on
in the United States. In fact, one of the ways that
we lured Tom here, and lure is the right word, and
I'll get into it. Well, I was going to say one of the
ways that we lured him here is that I kept insisting
to him that we were financially sound and that the
university was financially supportive of the
press and that we had almost a guarantee that they
would not financially neglect the press. Yeah.
And see, that was certainly one of the worries. And
I'm sure had he walked into the staff, that fear
would have been communicated very strongly. So he
needed that. Right. That's right. Well, he
wouldn't have come without it. He would not come.
Because we really had to thank him to come. I mean,
we just bent over backwards, and he said no twice,
and we kept going back at him. Okay, how did you find
him? What was the process? Okay, this is sort of,
everything about this is just the personal touch,
and it's interesting. I said, I was sent in to build
a team and try to pull the finances together and put
together a strategic plan. And we knew that we
weren't going to start a search until that was
done. So when we were about maybe almost a year into
my being there, we said, now it's time to start a
search. And Bowen was here at the time. And Jerry
was my boss. And they both said to me, would you like
that job? And I said, I would love that job. I love
the press, but I'm not what the press needs. I said,
the press needs someone who knows publishing.
I've done what I can do for it. Now they need someone
who can take them to the next level. Because I said,
I think that they have maximized what they can do at
the level where they are, and now they need to get
into some new, really exciting publishing. And I
can't do that for them. Because they said, if you
would like the job, you've done such a good job,
everybody there loves you, you may stay. And I
thought, well, this is the most fun job I have ever
had in my life. That's a tough decision for you.
Well, it was... It was, it was and it wasn't. It
wasn't because I knew that they needed better than
me. Number one, even though they really did, all of
them came in and begged me to stay. But number two, I
like being involved in a million different things
in the university, and I didn't want to let go of
that. I knew if I'd stayed at the press, then I'd be
out of everything else. I like that. Which is part
of their glory. Oh, that's right. They like it that
way. They like it that way, that's right. But I
would have missed... the thread of the
university. Because I like all this stuff. So
anyway, we advertised in a lot of different
places. And we got in lots of different
applications. But we had a search committee. and
it was chaired by Fred Heath, and we had wonderful
people on this search committee, and everyone
kept saying, and what we did was we got
nominations, and was, I can't remember who it was,
who said that Tom Rotell's name had been
suggested. And so someone had asked him to submit
an application, which he did. And I don't think he
was serious about it, but he sent it in. And we all
discussed things like, well, he's the second
highest or the highest paid director in the
country. Can we afford him? He does a wonderful job
there, but why would he move?
He might even be thinking about retirement
because he's, you know, so he may not be interested
in taking on a new challenge like this. So anyway,
we narrowed the list, and we kept coming back to Tom
Rotell, and I don't know that anybody was
seriously considering him at the beginning, but
whoever was his champion on the search committee
kept bringing his name, and of course, there was no
reason to reject him because he was wonderful, but
We didn't know that he would even be as serious. And
so when we narrowed the list, he was on it. And he
might even have been the last person that we
brought in. But if not, he was the second to last.
And we brought some down. And they were good. But
everybody was hot and cold. Some people really
liked this one. Others didn't like them at all. Tom
came in. Everyone loved him. Everyone.
Incidentally, he said he got an email from you.
Yes, he did. And he said, I think part of his
response was, if anybody is that enthusiastic
about a school or a class, I need to go see. Because
he said, I really wasn't thinking. I really needed
to do that. Well, that's what I was going to say. We
were on this network. And I forget what it was
called, but this publishing network. Oh, that
drove me crazy, also, on the job, because it seemed
to me like publishers had nothing more to do than to
sit and write these very long treatises over the
Internet. Because these things would be just, you
know, take you 20 minutes to read them, and you'd
get 20, 30 of them a day. Oh, that's one good thing
about writing this history. Wardlaw and Lyman
loved to write letters. That's all they did. Well,
that's all these publishers did. That's what they
did. They didn't have email. Well, because of
that, I had Tom Rotell's address. And so I did write
him a very long email. And actually, I didn't write
it to him. I wrote it to everybody out there. I put it
on the internet. Oh, OK. And I said, I really
encourage all of you. This is a wonderful press. We
have very talented people. The university is very
supportive of it. Because at the time, they were
all talking, they were all agonizing over
internet. It was funny to read. They were
agonizing over their dwindling resources and the
fact that the universities were pulling away
their support, and they were in these dumpy little
environments. They didn't know what they were
going to do. And with electronic publishing, oh,
moaning and groaning. And I was writing and
saying, I encourage you to apply here. We are in a
beautiful building. The university gives us
financial support. They've committed to it. It's
wonderfully talented people. We've got nowhere
to go but up. It's exciting. And so that's what,
yes, and that is what made Tom Rotel. And then Tom
and I communicated a couple of times. Well, then we
offered him the job after a very lengthy
interviewing process. We offered him the job, and
he turned it down. Oh, I didn't know that. Oh, yes,
he turned it down. So we went back at it again, and I
got on the phone with him, and we tried to a couple of
times, and Bill Perry got on the phone with him. We
brought him back again. We offered him the job
again. And I believe he turned it down again. Or if
he didn't turn it down, he just, yes, he was very
cool. Until we finally put together a package. We
gave him a salary that was way more than we thought
the press could afford, and certainly way more
than they'd have paid me if I had taken the job. If I
had known I could make that much money, I'd have had
to say yes. We gave way more than we ever dreamed of
paying. Journalism kicked in some money. Bill
Perry, the library kicked in some money. So we put
together a wonderful package for him and we said he
better be good. And he took the job and everyone in
the press was unanimous. He was their first
choice. There was not a single person who had put
someone else ahead of him. That's good. That's a
good one. So that's how we ended up where we did. And
when I left, I left without looking back, because I
said it was a wonderful experience, but they've
got the right person there now to do what needs to be
done. I think so. I think he still remains to prove
himself in a way, but it's going to be really
interesting. He fancies himself, and probably
is. They manage him. And he says, I'm really more of
a, you can call him a micromanager, since he's
trying to tell everybody what to do. He's
hands-on. To refine and... And I think that's
exactly what they needed, because I didn't know
how to tell Susan how to do better the publishing
part of it, and I didn't know how to work with Mary
Lynn and doing the editing, and I certainly didn't
know how to work with authors and doing the
acquisitions, and so he has the talent To develop
those people. He has the knowledge and the skill to
develop the talent, further develop their
talents. I didn't have that. All I could do was to
give them the motivation to work on developing
their own talent. But I couldn't give them the
technical. Well, there's such a strong base in the
street area. The vigil is enormous. It really is.
It is. And it's still exciting. That's what I say. I
just hope that they're still having as much fun as
they were having when I was there. Well, that's
hard to do. And you know, someone... Scholarly and
a commercial press. And so, because before I got
there, I really didn't even understand what the
purpose of this press was. Well, I was going to ask
you about that. Did you have a, from the
administrative perspective, what was their
view, and I think that view had changed indeed with
the then current administration from what it had
been with Vandiver
and with Jack Williams, you know, the regular
patrons in the press. And the new administration
really was not. And
Bowen, I think, is probably the press would never
be one of his favorite things. No. No, that's
right. So that world has changed, and the press,
for example, does now report to the provost
instead of to the president. And that was my idea,
as a matter of fact, because when you report to the
president, Especially if it's a president that's
not one of your supporters, you get nothing. You
get no attention, you get nothing. Whereas
reporting to the provost kind of ensured that
ongoing financial support, and it ensured that
scholarly approach. They were very, very
apprehensive about that change. And I kept saying
to them, relax, you'll like it better. But they
felt like they were being demoted. Yes. And it was
my suggestion. It was part of our operational
review that suggested that they be taken from the
president and given to the provost, where they
could get some visibility and some attention and
not just, you know, Rick would go to the
president's staff meetings and his claim to fame
was that he poured the coffee there. And I'm very
serious. Everybody said, Rick Stetter does the
coffee. And he would tell you himself, my only role
in that staff meeting
is to pour the coffee. But now, I'm hoping that
Tom has built a strong relationship with Fred
Heath at the library, and with Bill Perry, and with
the dean. I mean, that's where he belonged. Yeah, I
think you're probably right. I think one of the
problems, as I said, and I think this came up in the
conversation with several people, in fact, is
still that the scholarly community, the Texas A&M
academics, don't still have much sense of what the
press is, and what it does for them or to them or
anything else. It's amazing, but it's still
isolated. I read something just yesterday on the
Aggie Hotline. I was going to ship it over to Mary
Lynn and say, what's going on here? And then I
didn't. But it was where one of our history
professors has recently, is just now publishing a
book that he got some kind of a, fancy grant to do on
Tejanos and something else down at the border, and
it's being published by University of New Mexico
Press, and I was going to say, what's going on here?
We've got our Borderlands series that would have
fit in perfectly. No, it wasn't Bob. Oh, I know who
it is. It's Armando Alonso. Yes, that's exactly
right. I think that's what it was. I don't know why
he went there. Well, New Mexico's a wonderful
place. Yeah, sure. But, you know. Why in the world
wasn't Tom over in the history department talking
about that? Or someone. Mary Lynn, she's the
borderlands person. Good point. Yeah, they
really need to work on that. And I don't quite know
what the solution is. One of the perceptions that
indeed, maybe most press editors have, directors
have, is that the The faculty are never
supportive. I've seen that in the writing of your
operations, which is one of the reasons Wardlaw is
so terribly interested in trying to fix his
association to other levels, to the former
students, for one thing, and to the
administration. But the administration and
former students are not interested. Some of them
are interested in scholarly press, but most of
them would rather see the glitzy commercial kinds
of publications. Sure, that's right. I know I
asked John Lindezzer, why in the world are you so
supportive of the French? I said, do you like
books? He said, no, I don't like books. He said, I
like A&M. And what does he support? He supports the
artsy kinds of things. Yeah, oh, sure. He doesn't
support the scholarly stuff. No, no. And so does
Joe Moore. Right, right. And that's okay. I'm not
knocking that. I mean, I like that, too. And, you
know, I'm not interested in reading those
scholarly books. But when I got there, I
recognized, because before that, if you had
talked to me about the press, I'd have said, oh,
that old boring stuff. No wonder they don't make
any money. They don't print anything that's
interesting. When I got there, I realized I'd
learned the value of the scholarly press. And now
my impression is that is that this needs to be a
scholarly press. And it can be a premier scholarly
press. And I'm disappointed if Tom is not doing his
job in this community with promoting the
scholarly aspect. Because that's what I thought
he could do that I can't. I think he is aware of that.
And I think he is working in that direction. And I
think it's particularly concerning in relation
with the scholarly community and building that
relationship. He's very proud, for example. But
he also is concerned about selling books, which
you have to do. Well, and that's a balance that the
whole press realizes. That's kind of a fun
balance. It is, yeah. It makes it a real challenge.
That's right. You have to maintain credibility
and also accountability in a very literal
financial sense. That was always a fun thing for us
to discuss, too, as a press was, OK, this doesn't
really fit into the scholarly mission, but on the
other hand, It's borderline. Look at how much
money we can make on this. And everybody
acknowledged that they loved to do